>> Hello I'm Chantel Westerman
for Wisdom Television.
Welcome to our "Wisdom
Workshop" series.
It's interesting to note
that in the last 18 months,
nearly a quarter
of a million people
have come to Whole
Life Expos looking
for information about natural
health, personal growth,
and global change.
Today, I'd like to
invite you to join me
as I walk the floor
of a Whole Life Expo,
attending the
workshops, and meeting
some of the best-selling
authors in the field.
You may be surprised.
This world is a
lot more mainstream
than you ever thought.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In Phoenix, Whole
Life Expo attendees
were treated to
a special event--
an appearance by the Tibetan
monks of Drepung Loseling.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The monks are
particularly renowned
for their multiphonic singing.
[THROAT SINGING]
Each chant master simultaneously
intones three notes, thus
creating a complete
cord with one voice.
[THROAT SINGING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the Dance of the
Black Hat Masters,
the performers rejoice
in the elimination
of negative energies.
The Playful Yak Dance
symbolizes the joy
of all living creatures
when humans entered
the realm of balanced living.
The Lamas also demonstrate
a traditional form
of monastic inquiry.
It's a lively debate
that brings them
to deeper levels of
spiritual understanding.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We'll see more from the
monks later in the program.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I often would hear people go
to God asking God to send them
a relationship.
But I noticed that once
a relationship got here,
how often they stopped talking
to God after that point.
You sort of see it symbolized
in the marriage ceremony.
You go to the
synagogue or the church
on the day of the wedding,
but then you don't necessarily
go back.
There's this sense that we ask
God to send us a relationship.
We might even thank God
for the fact that He did.
But how little we actually
make the sacred dimension
of our lives a part of
our deepest relationships.
Now, the modern
world, particularly
under the Christian
dispensation,
has seen God over here
and sex over there.
That's a large part
of the issue, which
has led us to think of
our romantic lives very,
very separately from
our sacred lives.
And what I'm interested in is,
what role does spirituality
play in our romantic journey?
And what role does
our romantic journey
play in our spiritual lives?
I know that I've had the
experience-- as many of us,
if not all of us have--
of having been
very much in love.
And then, after a
certain period of time,
if a certain something didn't
continue, the world would say,
well, you know,
that wasn't real.
That wasn't real.
That was just a delusion.
That was just an infatuation,
and then reality set in.
You've had that experience?
But I've come to believe,
at this point in my life,
that that is the exact
opposite of the truth.
That was not delusion.
That was reality.
And then non-reality set in.
So there's Jennifer,
and there's John.
So how does the Holy
Spirit make assignments?
Well, theoretically,
the Holy Spirit
sees Jennifer and goes,
what Jennifer most needs
to learn in her life is
blah, blah, blah, blah.
And John-- John could be
in Timbuktu at that moment,
but the universe
says, John needs
to learn blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah.
Now, if Jennifer and
John knew each other,
that would provide the
maximal opportunities.
There's no one better
than John for Jennifer
to learn with it this time.
There's no one better
than Jennifer than John
to learn with at this time.
And so the notion here
is that the universe is
like a gigantic bio-computer.
And so the universe
then conspires.
John might think he's going to
spend the summer in Timbuktu.
Ha!
Because he's needed to meet
Jennifer at her cousin's
wedding in Cleveland.
Right?
So those two will be brought
together by cosmic forces.
Now, that is to say that
they are destined to meet.
That is not to say that they
are destined to stay together.
Free will-- you know,
karma says you will meet.
Free will says what you will
do with the opportunity.
Now, what's going
on inside Jennifer,
and what's going on inside John?
Well, Jennifer and John are
just like the rest of us.
Deep in their hearts, they yearn
for the deepest, truest love.
How do I know that?
Because Jennifer
and John are human.
In "A Course in
Miracles," it says
that our love for another
person, our deepest
passion for another
person, is but a shadow--
it's a shadow-- of
our love for God.
You know, in "Les
Miserable," there's
that song where the words
go "to love another person
is to see the face of God."
You know, it's a Heaven
that we yearn for.
"The Course in Miracles"
says Heaven is not
a place or condition.
It's an awareness.
And when we fall in
love with somebody,
we have an awareness of
our oneness with them.
We have a merger on the
deepest level of our souls.
We bypass boundaries, not
in a dysfunctional way,
but in the highest,
most transcendent way.
And we experience our oneness
with another human being.
And if enough of us do that,
all Heaven breaks loose.
So notice, a girlfriend
of mine once said,
I can only be with a man so long
before I have to kill him off.
before the color of his socks
starts bothering me.
I can only be with a man
so long before the fact
that he is not a perfect
human being becomes
an unbearable fact to me.
As I say often, if
you're not perfect,
what perfect person
do you think is
going to show up in your life.
You're not perfect.
Why would they be perfect?
And that's not even
to mention that I just
don't think there are that many
enlightened masters dating.
You know what I'm saying?
So what kind of
situation is this
if we have no hope
of holding on to love
if someone not being perfect is
such a bitter disappointment?
Well, what we are given,
from a spiritual perspective,
is the notion that the whole
point of the relationship
is that we are
here to be healed.
That is, in fact, why
John and Jennifer met.
Jennifer is thinking, on
some level of her mind,
I want to meet a man in whose
love I can forget my wounds.
And God is saying, I'm
going to send Jennifer
a man with whom she
can address her wounds.
But she will only
be able to address
her wounds in a situation
where they come up.
So then, Jennifer might later
say, I don't like this guy.
He wounded me.
When the truth of the matter
is he didn't wound her.
He triggered her wounds that
she had before she even met him.
And they had to be
triggered in order for her
to take a good look at them,
for her to forgive whoever--
whether it was someone
else or herself.
Which now, at this
time, her mind probably
is projecting it wasn't someone
else, and it wasn't her.
It was John.
And so she now has the
opportunity to heal.
But what usually happens,
or happens so often?
At that point,
John says, I can't
deal with this woman's issues.
Or Jennifer says, I don't like
the way this guy makes me feel.
What she's really
saying is, I don't
like the way the last 30 years
of my life have made me feel,
but I'm coping.
But in his presence,
I can't even cope,
it comes up so strong.
In "A Course in
Miracles," this is
called the difference between
a special relationship
and a holy relationship.
A special relationship is where
Jennifer's ego meets John's ego
and where Jennifer wants
John to be perfect somehow.
And she wants to hide
her own imperfections,
because she figures if John
saw what she's really like,
he would probably reject her.
And John is doing the
same thing to Jennifer.
And if either one of them had
the audacity or the misfortune
to show up as a
real human being,
they are likely to be rejected.
A holy relationship is where
John and Jennifer understand,
we both are wounded.
That's why we were sent here.
Our love can be a
hospital for our souls.
And your stuff's
going to come up,
and my stuff's going to come up.
Often, not because we're
not meant for each other,
but because we are.
But we can make of this
relationship a sanctuary.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Now, Mary, I come into
this a little bit skeptically.
But I think my skepticism
comes from not knowing
what aura video vision is.
>> This system will allow you
to interact live with your aura.
You'll actually be able to see
it live and what's happening
and what's going on--
all the responses to your
emotional, your mental,
and some of your
physical, as well.
So as we're talking
about different things,
you're actually
going to see a change
and alter on screen
while that's happening.
>> What is an aura, exactly?
>> Basically, an aura is the
electromagnetic energy field
around our body.
>> Ah, all right.
>> Everything that's alive has
it-- plants, animals, humans.
So go ahead and slide your
fingers right into the sensor.
And basically, what's
happening with the sensor
is it's reading
off the acupuncture
points on your fingers.
Takes that information and
pulls it into your aura
so we can take a
good look at it.
And the first thing
we're going to notice
is you have a lot of blues.
You've got some greens.
But the main thing is
right above your head,
into the crown chakra.
>> Yes.
>> And if I mention chakras, do
you understand what I'm talking
about?
>> Well, let's talk
about them a little bit,
for people who might not know.
>> Basically, there's seven
energy centers on the body.
They're called chakras.
They are all tied
into hormonal glands
that we have in our bodies.
This one happens to be the crown
chakra, the one way up on top
that ties us into our higher
self, the more divine aspect
about who and what we are.
Now, as I'm looking
at yours, you
have a lot of blue, deep blues,
and you've got a lot of purple.
Now, really, what that
tells me is you're
the type of person who
really is in search
for very deep information.
Not just on the surface or
shallow-type information,
but really the deeper aspect
of who and what you are.
You're probably
the type of person
that looks up into the stars
at night and goes, God,
there's gotta be more
to life than just what I
experience on a regular basis,
because it shows up as that.
>> What's the violet?
>> Now, the violent really is
the aspect of the visionary,
the higher intuitive.
So you're probably
extremely intuitive.
You just know things.
And you feel it right here.
You get it in your
gut, and you know when
it's right, when it's wrong.
When you meet
people, you probably
size them up very well.
You just have that
inner intuitive knowing.
>> And there's
green on one side.
What is that?
That comes and goes.
>> When we see a lot of
greens, it's about our tie-in
to animals and into nature
and the ability to teach.
>> Like I'm thinking
about my dogs right now.
Whoo, look at the green
that just came up!
>> Did you see
the greens pop up?
Sure.
Especially at your heart
center, because that obviously
is an area for you
that's important.
So it kind of pops
up in that area,
and you get a lot of
green around that.
>> That's so interesting.
>> Isn't that awesome?
So now, as we come up here, this
is your third eye center, OK?
Now, what we can tell
in relation to that
is your third eye is above--
it's more up here into your
crown area instead of here
where it should be.
>> Oh.
Why is that?
>> That's because sometimes you
have a tendency to be a little
ungrounded.
You probably spend a
lot of time at night,
while you're sleeping,
out of your body,
maybe doing a lot of traveling.
So you might have some pretty
active dreams at night.
You might wake up in the
morning feeling pretty fatigued,
drained, like,
God, I feel like--
>> This is amazing.
>> --I didn't sleep at all.
>> This is amazing, Mary.
This is really, really
interesting stuff.
>> Well, you can tell a lot
from an aura when you know how
to assimilate all that energy.
>> Yeah.
>> So what we can do is go
ahead now and just print out
your aura.
>> Right.
>> What that's going to do
is freeze you in that space.
>> Oh, look at the--
>> And it's going to
take it just a moment.
>> --space I got frozen in.
>> Yeah, sorry.
>> Although, the way I
was frozen in the picture,
it kind of tells the
real story of me.
It's like, don't get too close.
>> Yeah, keep a
watchful eye out.
Don't let anything get
in there too closely.
>> Thank you, Mary.
This has been great.
>> Fabulous.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Let's try to figure
out-- and I'm sure you know,
but you know, I don't know why
there's such a bad rap attached
to the idea of a witch.
>> Yeah.
Well, when you say
the word "witch,"
people immediately think of all
those ridiculous stereotypes,
right?
They think of the green-faced
hag with the wart on her nose,
brewing up evil potions.
And unfortunately, a
lot of fundamentalists
think of Satanists, which
has absolutely nothing
to do-- neither of them.
They're stereotypes.
The reason that
people think that is
because 500 years ago, the
Church accused practitioners
of the old religion of the
Goddess of being Satanists.
>> So it started off with
the religion of the Goddess?
That's what it
was known as then?
>> Oh yes.
It's the ancient pre-Christian
religion of the Goddess.
>> I didn't know that.
>> It's ancient.
It goes back thousands of years.
It predates Judaism and
Christianity and Islam
by thousands of years.
It was actually the
religion out of which
Western civilization was born.
7500 BC, the very first
evidence of the human effort
to create civilization in all
of the various river valleys--
the Tigris and
Euphrates, the Ganges,
which was named for the great
goddess Ganga, the Nile.
They were all
Goddess-worshipping cultures.
They all saw the divine
as present in the world.
They saw the body of the
Goddess in the Earth,
and they worshipped the Goddess.
And that is what the
old religion-- that's
what witchcraft actually is.
It's the European
shamanic survival
of the ancient religion
of the Goddess.
It's a lot like Native American
spirituality, in many ways,
and it's cosmology,
many practices.
Has a lot of
similarities to Taoism
and Australian
aboriginal wisdom.
>> That's amazing to know.
I would have never known that.
But when you go back in
Greek mythology, of course,
like Isis--
>> Right, a great
ancient Egyptian goddess,
a magnificent figure.
When a woman sees an
image of the Goddess,
she's looking in a mirror.
And she sees herself--
perhaps for the first time--
in a way that the culture
of the world that we live in
has never allowed
her or encouraged her
or helped her to see herself.
She sees herself as wise.
She sees herself as powerful.
She sees herself as
creative, dynamic, healing,
and beautiful, no matter
what she looks like.
And I think, for
men, that when they
look at an image of the
Goddess, they see healing,
and they see permission
to have their feelings,
to be spontaneous, to
be sexual, to retrieve
the part of themselves
that they've
lost because the culture has
placed such emphasis on what
I think of as a very
distorted kind of masculinity.
So 500 years ago,
the Church went
after practitioners of the
old religion of the goddess
for a number of reasons.
They were competition, had
a very different experience
of the divine.
And I had absolutely
no familiarity
with any of this history.
I had no idea what had happened.
The struggle that
women have today--
for equal rights, for equal
pay, for equal opportunities--
stem from what happened to them
500 years ago during the witch
craze, which was really
a women's Holocaust.
They lost all of
their legal rights.
You couldn't receive
an education.
You couldn't practice the
old religion of the Goddess.
And what happened was
that it went underground.
And to the victors went the
spoils and the opportunity--
>> Of course.
>> --to retell history,
and the lie grew.
>> Where did the
word "witch" come in?
Because goddess is so
lovely and so powerful.
But almost anybody I know, when
you say a witch, they go, ugh.
Even when it's somebody
you don't like,
you're not actually calling
her a witch, but you say,
she's such a witch.
>> Oh, on the soap operas,
they do it all the time,
because they won't
use the B-word.
So they use the W-word.
>> That's right.
Susan Lucci has said that a lot.
And the witch has
actually become,
I think, a repository for
the culture's fear of women--
>> Interesting.
>> --which you
see 500 years ago.
And when I call
myself a witch, I'm
very clear that I'm taking
back my power as a woman,
because the damage that was done
to women and the damage that
was done to the old
religion of the Goddess.
Those two things are
inextricably intertwined.
But the word "witch" is actually
an old Anglo-Saxon word--
Wicca, W-I-C-C-A. And it
means a wise one or a shaman.
>> Really?
>> That's what it is.
>> How interesting is that?
Now, Wicca is the organization.
Do you think of
it as a religion?
>> I try not to.
When I think of
religion, I immediately
start thinking of hierarchies.
>> Yes.
>> And I think of theology,
which I think has left us
in a terrible state.
I think of it as a
spiritual practice,
because that's what it is.
It's not a belief system.
It's a system of practices.
And they are remarkable.
They are shamanic
practices, what
we call core shamanic
techniques, active meditations,
usually done in the
presence of nature.
Because for us, nature
is a spiritual nature.
And they are a
means of communing
with the divine, of seeing
the sacred in yourself
and in the world around you, in
other people and in the Earth
itself.
>> And are they
organized rituals?
I mean, for example, when we
think of Catholic, Muslim,
Judaism, you think of churches.
You think of synagogues.
You think of temples.
>> We don't have buildings.
They're very useful to have
if it gets particularly
hot or particularly cold,
but for us, the Earth
itself is sacred.
And so we work in
a circle, which
is a metaphor for the
divine, for the feminine.
It is also an expression
of an essential equality.
It's a non-hierarchical
spiritual practice.
Everyone is equal in a circle.
There is a priest, a priestess,
but they're teachers.
What they are doing is
teaching other people
how to use these
practices themselves.
>> There was a priest?
>> Yes.
>> So there are men in Wicca?
>> Yes, increasingly.
>> Now, see, this
is interesting.
>> Increasingly.
>> This is interesting,
because I think a lot
of the misconceptions
about Wicca are among--
I should rephrase that.
Among the misconceptions
about Wicca,
I think it's that
it's all women.
>> Yeah.
Well, that grew out of the
persecution and the fact
that 90% of the people tortured
and murdered were women.
And so from that, you got the
idea that witches were women.
But in fact, all
of our ancestors
were practicing this
ancient religion--
>> So there's a circle?
>> --men and women.
Yeah, we work in a circle.
It's called casting a circle.
It's basically the
creation or the recognition
of sacred space.
And very similar
to Native American
spirituality in that way.
And then there is an honoring
of the four directions--
the wisdom and the
powers and the spirits
of the four directions.
And then we begin to work.
We will invoke a goddess,
a god, which we understand
is a metaphor, an expression
of a particular aspect
of divine energy that is
appropriate to the work
that-- the spiritual,
sacred work that we're
doing at the time, whether
it's healing or love or peace
or spiritual enlightenment.
And then, it's really
an active meditation.
We create ritual.
It's very personal,
very dynamic.
You can create rituals that
are very personally meaningful.
Or there is the
ancient rituals, which
we have retrieved from the
Greek, from the Celtic,
from the Scandinavian,
the Romanian, the French.
We are actively engaged in a
kind of academic archeology,
pulling out these
ancient practices.
And they're usually
done to correspond
with the natural rhythms
of Earth and Moon
and Sun, because we're
seeking to attune ourselves
to the natural cycles
of the Earth, of nature.
Because for us, as I said,
nature is a spiritual teacher.
And by attuning ourselves
to those rhythms,
there is a great
wisdom that is provided
to us that helps us to
live in a sacred manner.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We are obsessed-- a
nation obsessed with age,
getting older.
Why are we so
uncomfortable with it?
>> Well, I think
there are two things.
One is we don't have to get old.
And two, we worry about some
of the disabilities of old age.
But the neat thing, the great
thing from our research,
is you can live both
younger and with a shorter
period of disability
at the end of life
if you make easy choices,
really easy choices--
for instance, just
changing to olive oil.
Now, this is a Misto,
a little sprayer,
so you can use less fat.
You need some fat.
You need about 25% of
your diet to be fat,
and it should be healthy fats.
And the worst fat is
margarine-- trans fat.
It's partially hydrogenated
oils, if you look on the label.
Switching from those to
healthy monounsaturated fat
makes you over
four years younger.
>> What about this this?
Is fat-free tomato sauce.
>> Right.
There are two reasons
we have fat-free stuff.
We want to think that
fat is fattening,
because it has nine calories
per ounce, if you will.
Having fat with your
food is much more caloric
than having fat free, but
it isn't necessarily better.
We need fat for a couple
of reasons, one of which
is to absorb the nutrients.
So tomato paste has
wonderful nutrients in it.
It keeps you younger.
There are a total
of nine studies
in humans that 10
tablespoons of tomato
paste a week decrease your risk
of prostate cancer 40% to 50%
and actually decrease the risk
of nine other cancers by about
the same amount.
But you don't absorb the tomato
sauce, the lycopene in it,
if you have it fat free.
>> And what about
something like rice?
I know that was a
big deal in the book.
>> Well, you want to eat--
there only are about 20 rules of
eating, and they're in the book
and they're on the website.
And it's easy to learn the 20.
But the first is,
eat what you like.
So eat the best foods.
Make it wonderful foods.
The second is eat nutrient
rich, calorie poor.
So you want to eat things
with a lot of nutrients in it.
One of the worst
foods white rice,
because they've taken all the
nutrients out, and all you get
is the calories.
On the other hand, a good
food is long grain wild rice.
So it's the same thing.
It doesn't take much
longer to cook it--
maybe a minute longer to cook
this versus the white rice--
and it's much, much
healthier, because it's
got all the nutrients in it.
So you want to have
complex carbohydrates,
but you want to have them
with the nutrients in them.
>> Before we go any further,
let's tell the audience where
they can find the RealAge
quiz on the internet.
>> Well, it's at
www.realage.com.
It's realage.com.
It's the easiest thing.
Four million people have taken--
a little over four million
have taken the RealAge quiz now.
>> For the people who
have not read the book,
the RealAge quiz is a quiz
you take that determines what?
>> Well, there are five
actual components to it.
But the first one
is it tells you
whether you're aging faster or
slower than your calendar age.
Obviously, all of us
want to be younger.
So it tells you whether
you are younger or not.
It gives you a landmark
of where you are.
The second thing it does is it
tells you all those choices you
have to make yourself younger.
So it tells you what you're
doing that get you older
and also what things you can
do to make yourself younger.
And then it does a
very important thing--
it values each choice for you.
So, for instance, it
might say that having
10 helpings of tomato paste
for the average man a week,
10 helpings of tomato
sauce or tomato paste,
will make him 8/10
of a year younger.
So he knows that if he starts
that now, within three years,
he gains almost a
full year younger.
But it does that with
each of your choices.
For everything else in
life, we have targets.
What this does is says, you
can rate everything in health
by its age effect
and then have a goal.
>> I'll tell you another place
where I and a lot of my friends
who took your quiz lost
points and became younger--
flossing.
>> Flossing-- that is,
preventing periodontal
disease--
is a huge benefit.
Not only does it make your smile
look great, but in addition,
and more importantly,
the bacteria
that set up periodontal
disease, that cause
disease in your
oral cavity, set up
an immune reaction which
attacks your arteries
and makes your arteries
older if you have it.
By flossing, by preventing that,
you make your arteries younger.
One of the ways you can
prevent wrinkling as well as
keep your arteries younger
and keep your memory intact,
prevent impotence, keep
quality of orgasm high.
Prevent heart disease and
stroke is to floss your teeth.
It's an easy one.
>> I never thought I would begin
a sentence like this, Michael,
but speaking of orgasms, how
does sex play a role in being
younger, staying younger?
>> We don't know why
it makes you younger,
but it actually decreases your
rate of aging in all three
components.
So it keeps your
arteries younger,
it keeps your immune
system younger,
and it shortens or
lessens the chance
of environmental and social
factors causing aging.
Now, we think it's because
of the companionship,
the intimacy, the relationship
and decreasing stress.
But no one knows why.
It's a different factor for
men and women, as you know.
For men, it's number of
orgasms a year, if you will,
that correlates.
For women, it's
quality of orgasm.
The more sex you have,
the younger you are.
>> One of the things that
really amazed me was--
see if I'm right
on this, Michael.
When you take vitamins,
it's a minus 6.5
or something in
the RealAge book.
>> It's a strong amount younger.
>> I don't take vitamins.
I thought, well, if I
eat the right foods.
Now, that was something
that surprised me.
What vitamins?
>> Surprised me, too.
None of my patients-- even I
don't eat balanced enough diet
to get the right
amount of multivitamins
to prevent deficiency disease.
So I take a
multivitamin every day,
and I tell my patients
to take what's
called an RDA, or daily
value, multivitamin every day.
But in addition, there
are more vitamins
that you take that
help optimize health,
and it's a pretty easy
mnemonic to remember--
CDEF, calcium and magnesium.
So it's the alphabet, CDEF,
and then calcium and magnesium
and the number 400.
>> What does F do for us?
>> F is not vitamin F, but
it's folic acid, or folate.
It's a B vitamin.
I just remember it that way,
because it fits with CDEF.
And the second part you have
to remember is the number 400.
So even I can remember this.
400 milligrams of vitamin
C three times a day.
Why do you need it
more than once a day?
Because it's water soluble,
and you urinate it out.
So in order to keep a
steady level, you need 400,
and you need it
three times a day.
Vitamin D, 400 international
units once a day.
Vitamin E, 400 international
Folate, or folic acid, 400 mcg
more than a diet once a day.
Calcium, 400 three times a day.
Calcium you can
take all at once.
You don't need to spread it out.
>> Especially for women.
>> And magnesium, 400.
Well, calcium is very
important for men, too.
The reason we think it's more
important-- the reason we've
associate it's more
important with women
is because women tend
to live longer than men.
And it's in their older age
that they get osteoarthritis
and they get osteoporosis,
both of which
are helped greatly
by having calcium.
Men build up bigger bones
when they're younger.
So when they fall
when they get older,
they don't have quite
the number of fractures.
And they die of other
things before women.
So, in fact, we've thought it
isn't as important for men,
but it's just as
important for men.
And it's especially
important preventing
arthritis or osteoarthritis.
>> Do women or men
age more quickly?
>> Well, it turns out that
until age 50, men age quicker.
And then, those women who
don't take hormone replacement
therapy age quicker.
By age 66, men and
women catch up.
Now, men never quite
catch up to women,
and that's why women
tend to live longer.
And in fact, right now, in the
RealAge book, as we look at it,
both men and women can change
their rate of aging greatly.
And in the last 12
years in America,
in fact, men have aged as
a group, believe it or not,
only 9.7 years--
women, about 10.9 years.
So men are doing
things to catch up
to the slower rate of
aging that women have now.
>> So if the world stood
still right now, Michael,
and everybody was listening to
you and everybody could hear,
would you give men different
advice than you would women
in terms of aging?
>> No, I'd give everyone
the same advice.
Take the RealAge program,
find out your options,
and then choose some you want.
Because what is
easy for you may be
difficult for me and vice versa.
But we all have some
things that we can
do that are relatively easy.
My most successful patients
start with three or four things
from the RealAge book--
read the chapters
as well as pick
them out, so they
know and understand what to do.
Then, after 90
days, they're doing
two or three of the three or
four things they've chosen,
and they add one.
And they incrementally add.
And pretty soon, they're
getting much younger
and feeling more
vigorous and knowing
that they'll be around to
care for their loved ones,
rather than having to be
cared for by their loved ones.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
How did this whole
program start?
It started by someone
who was smoking.
One of my friends--
wasn't a friend at that
time, was a patient--
came to my office.
He was having an
operation on his leg.
He couldn't walk from here
to one third of the way
to the other side of
the room without having
to stop two or three times.
He was smoking and wasn't
getting enough blood flow
into his legs.
So he said, what's my risk, Doc?
The surgeon has told
me that I don't have
much risk, because I'm only 49.
And I said, Simon,
if you were only 49,
you wouldn't have much risk.
But you're smoking makes you
at least eight years older.
He said, I can't be.
And I said, why not?
And he said, because
no man in my family
has lived to their
50th birthday,
and I got a birthday
in two weeks.
So, remember, my job is
partially to reassure patients.
That's the job of a physician.
So now, I'd done
the right thing.
So I said, Simon,
you can get younger.
If you stop smoking today,
you get one year younger
in two months and two years
younger in five months.
And he stopped smoking that day.
Now, I wasn't bright
enough to put it
together as how good a
motivational tool this was
till about eight
years later, when
I was seeing another patient
who wasn't taking their blood
pressure pills.
Now, I have every
one of my patients
bring all their
pills in with them.
So he brought two bottles
of blood pressure pills.
His name was Martin.
And one of them was half
empty, and one of them
was hardly touched, and his
blood pressure was 140 over 90.
And they were both renewed
from-- the pharmacy data
on them, it was the same date.
And I said, Martin, you're
not taking your blood pressure
pills the way you
should, are you?
He said, how do you know?
And I said, well,
half of one pill
is meh, not much of the other.
He says, well, what
difference does it make?
You said my blood
pressure is 140 over 90,
and many doctors wouldn't
even treat me for 140 over 90,
would they?
And I said, no, but it
makes you five years older
than if your blood
pressure were 115 over 75.
He said, what do you mean?
I said, you live as though--
he was 47 at the time.
You live as though
you're 52, not 47.
You live with the vigor
and vitality of someone
who's five years older.
And he said, show me the data.
He'd been a physics
major in college.
So I showed him
the data, which was
from a VA cooperative study.
And he said, how many
other things in medicine
can you do that for?
And I said, why do
you want to know?
And he said, because
this is really powerful.
People have told me
I might die a year
or two early if I don't
take my blood pressure
pills the way I'm
supposed to, but no one
has told me I'd live older.
And then he repeated
the question--
how many other things in
medicine can you do this for?
And I said, I don't know.
And he said, how much will
it cost me to find out?
So I said, well, I know some
epidemiologist at Stanford
and some at Hopkins,
and I know the person
who runs the Health Risk
Assessment Project for the CDC
in Atlanta, Georgia.
And then we need a statistician,
because all this is,
is putting his net present
value of health changes,
just like people do net
present value of investments.
And he said, OK, how
much will that cost?
And I said, oh, about $25,000.
We'll need two meetings and
some research assistant time.
To my surprise, he
reached into his pocket,
pulled out his checkbook, wrote
a check for $25,000, and said,
I want the answer in six weeks.
Well, we gave him the answer
in about 10 weeks, and we said,
you could do it for
60 to 70 things.
And he said, how much
will it cost to do it?
And I said, well, that's
much more expensive.
That's a lot of time.
It's probably at least $10,000
for each item, maybe $50,000.
It's probably 800,000
to a million and a half.
And to my surprise, he
reached into his pocket,
pulled out his checkbook,
wrote a check for $50,000,
and said, get started.
I'll help you raise
the rest of the money.
And that's how we
started this project.
He's the one who is the
developer of the RealAge
website so you can
take the RealAge
program free on the
web at www.realage.com.
The long program is what
I urge you to now take.
Its 45 minutes, but don't
worry, you can do it in modules.
So you can do five minutes
here and five minutes there
till you get all of it entered.
But the great thing is
remember your password,
because you can go back and
update your record anytime
and find out your real age.
And remember, it's
never too late,
whether you're in a nursing
home or you're here.
There are always things
you can do to get younger,
and it's never too
late to get younger.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Competing with a man, it's
not even about good or bad.
It's stupid.
Pat Ellen tells a great
story that I always remember.
She's talking about
this whole idea
of showing respect
for a man's thoughts--
instead of competing, showing
respect for man's thoughts.
And this is a great story,
I think, about competition.
She says, a man and a woman
are going to a dinner party,
and before they go
to a dinner party,
they go to a cocktail party.
They get to the dinner party,
and somebody says to them,
were you over at the cocktail
party over at the hotel?
And the guy says,
yeah, we were there.
And the person at the dinner
party says, how many people
were over there?
And the guy says, oh, I think
there were about 75 people.
And the woman, the competitive,
woman says, uh, darling,
there were not 75 people there.
There were 30 people.
Then she even says to the
person who asked, trust me,
there were maybe 30.
Right?
This is a woman who
will lose her man.
Now, the women in the
audience at Pat Allen
would say, now, wait a
minute, but what if there were
only 30 people at the party?
What do you expect me to do?
Just kind of pretend I
don't know what I know?
No.
It's not about pretending
you don't know what you know.
It's about showing respect
for this man's thoughts,
especially in public.
So women would say, well,
what should the woman
do in that situation?
Pat Allen says, just
kind of look at him.
He just said there
were 75 people there,
and you just kind
of look at him.
It's a very good chance he's
going to look at you and say,
what?
How many people do
you think were there?
And then you can
say something like,
I thought there were fewer.
And then he might
even say, well,
how many people do
you think were there?
I thought there were about 30.
Now, she says, if
you do that, if you
do that, later at night, just
about before you get into bed,
he will turn to you
and say, you know,
I think there were about 30
people there at that party.
See the difference?
Respect was shown
for his thoughts.
So, for me, from the
way I see those things
about competition with a man,
I can do it if I want to do it.
But I have to
decide what I want.
Do I want to win the argument,
or do I want the man?
Because the real argument
is not about the facts.
The real argument is
about that push/pull
that is not comforting.
And a man wants to feel
comfort from a woman.
That's the point of
the relationship.
He's doing that stuff all day.
He's doing that stuff.
I mean, isn't that what we want?
Isn't that what we want?
To me, the secret
of a relationship
is how many times we can tell
each other how fabulous we
are on any given day.
That's it.
How many ways were you
able to tell him today
how fantastic he is?
How many ways today were
you able to tell him
how brilliant he is?
How many ways today
are we able to tell him
how wonderful he is?
We can talk, we can go
into all this stuff--
all this stuff-- but let's
be really, really honest
with ourselves-- that's it.
Because what is it that
we want to be told?
We want to be told
that we're wonderful.
And then we want to learn
how, when somebody says,
you're wonderful, you can say,
well, I might be wonderful,
but you're even more wonderful.
Because you know what?
People are wonderful,
and they hear all day,
every day that they're not.
And they deserve to come home
to you and hear that they are.
And that's what it's about.
And that's what home is
supposed to be, right?
That's what home
is supposed to be.
Home is supposed to be where
somebody isn't on your case
all the time.
The challenge of marriage is
to not let the routine begin
to define the relationship.
You have to protect
mystery in a relationship.
You have to protect the
magic in a relationship.
You have to be careful not to
let the worldly things take up
the whole screen.
And that's why you need
a sacred dimension.
Only a sacred dimension,
because a sacred dimension is
another place in consciousness.
The thinking of the world is
a destroyer of the sacred.
And most of us spend-- you
know, we're on the Earth.
We have jobs.
We have lives.
We spend a lot of time in
the worldly dimensions.
And whether it's in a
relationship with ourselves
or relationship with
another human being,
we have to build a temple.
And you need a temple in your
home and in your practice
together and in your
prayers together
and your meditations together.
And ask God to make you the
mother that he would make you.
And ask Him to make you the
wife that he would have you be.
And pray together for your
child, and pray for each other.
And I promise you,
that's really--
from a spiritual
perspective, from a faith
perspective, that's it.
You don't even
realize how potent,
how powerful prayer
and meditation
are until you don't do them.
That's why people are saying--
most people know me better
than to say this anymore,
but people say, yeah, yeah.
I mean, I know about prayer.
I know about meditation.
But I mean, what else can I do?
I just told you, well, here's
the most powerful force
in the universe.
You could try that.
And people are like, yeah,
yeah, but what else can I do?
Doesn't that make sense?
One more.
Right there.
>> I recently-- my wife and I,
we've been together 20 years.
And I've recently taken on,
for my life and her life,
a domain in our life called--
I want to get it right--
outrageous romance, you know?
Like a full, self-expressed
love of my wife--
not just for us, but
like a model for our kids
and their kids and their kids.
And so I just want to thank you,
from my soul, this opportunity,
having us be here.
And it's new.
You know, this spiritual
path that you speak of
is new for me.
It's a new experience, and it is
absolutely the most enlivening
space I can be in.
I mean, it's like, yeah.
You know, that's
what's been missing.
>> Well, we wish we could
just make you into pill form.
[APPLAUSE]
Can we take him home?
We're thrilled for both
of you, and we mean it.
I think we cry at
weddings because we
feel, subconsciously,
somewhere deep down,
if they could have it,
we could all have it.
>> Yeah, so I really want to
let you know, each of you,
that it truly is available
in your lives to have
a rock-your-world romance with
the partner that you're with.
>> How wonderful.
>> And all it takes is your
speaking it into reality.
You speak it.
And then you see
what practices you
can put into place to have that
happen, to keep it in reality.
One of those practices, for
me, is like flowers forever.
I want to make sure that my wife
has fresh flowers around her
forever.
Because I got that that's a--
>> See, it's interesting
you say that.
Some men would say--
I have a part in my book
about this idea of a woman
being high maintenance.
Now, that's high maintenance,
to give a woman flowers
all the time.
Women have got to
stop apologizing
for being high maintenance.
[APPLAUSE]
Damn right I'm high maintenance.
Does a Jaguar or a
Rolls Royce apologize
for being high maintenance?
Does the most gorgeous
house apologize
for being high maintenance?
The men I know, what they're
really looking for deep inside,
is a woman--
they're not really looking
for a low-maintenance woman.
They're looking for a woman
that makes them really want
to maintain at a high level.
>> Absolutely.
>> A guy doesn't really want
to not bring her flowers.
He wants to meet a
woman that he really
wants to bring flowers to.
Isn't that right?
>> Yeah.
>> So why would a woman
go around saying, oh,
you have to bring me flowers.
On every level, your
energy should just
exude, what kind of idiot are
you that you wouldn't bring me
flowers?
You have to be a woman that
the guy wouldn't even conceive
of not bringing you flowers.
You need to be a woman that
a man would think, oh, I bet
a woman like that gets flowers.
Damn right.
Right?
Your wife, obviously,
has this down.
She's taught you well.
>> Quite.
Very well.
>> Thank you for sharing.
Thank you so much.
It was really lovely
to be here with you.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you.
Thank you so much.
[MUSIC PLAYING]